uh so hopefully she'll join uh welcome
everybody uh we'll call the meeting to
order this is the Wednesday October 23rd
uh regular meeting of the town of vover
board of
Finance uh we'll first recite the Pledge
of Allegiance I pledge allegiance to the
flag of the United States of America and
to the
republication
God and justice for all okay thank thank
you and we will move on to agenda item
two which is public speak Eric you mind
going around the room and see if we have
any opport anybody waiting to
speak okay first up Shannon
Lowden thank you um good evening Board
of Finance even though it's not on your
agenda tonight I want to give you an
update on the tribe board policy and to
make a
suggestion um attorney O'Brien at your
request reviewed the tri board policy as
passed by the Board of Ed but instead of
providing a legal opinion about it he
largely rewrote it and the board of
Selectmen decided not to take any action
on it or either on either of the two
versions so here's my
suggestion um there now is a capital
fund that's been created for Andover
elementary
school so let's treat that as we used to
treat the two 2%
non-linguistic fund used to be
permission to put in permission to take
out um and then we can forego all of
this about a new policy that hasn't
taken effect no matter or been Pro you
know passed by all three boards no
matter how much work we put in um so
that's my update as well as my
suggestion thanks for listening and I
look forward to hearing what you decide
thanks thank you Sharon
okay uh Jerry CR
no I'm just here to listen and take
notes thank
you okay Melissa
latesa no comment thank
you okay uh I'm assuming Community voice
channel is not going to want to so
Jen I'm all set thank
you okay Mark that's everybody that I
have unless I miss somebody no that
looks like everybody thank you okay we
will move on to agenda item three which
as changes and additions to the agenda
the any of the board members like to
propose any changes or additions to the
agenda as
posted okay hearing none we'll go ahead
and move on to Old business uh first
item is 5A which is I'm sorry um a
little unusual sort order here but uh we
have the approval of the meeting minutes
from uh September 25th 2024
you had a chance to look over
those um anybody have any comments or
would like to make a
motion I would make the motion to accept
the minutes as
presented okay thank you Bill we have a
second I'll second it okay Kimberly
thank you any more
discussion all those in favor say I I I
any opposed
any
extensions okay hearing none the motion
passes thank you we'll move on to
item uh oops sorry I got to get back out
to the top
here item 5B which is the check register
for the
town um do we have any questions on the
check
register none
here all set I'm all set
okay um we also had the next item which
is uh
5b2 which uh you can see the question
written on the agenda which is including
the Board of Ed check register in the
future so there was some discussion um
about including this it kind of came up
between the administrators and uh Joan
and Eric and I uh she had it listed on
the on the agenda I mean my personal
view is that there's no really reason
for the Board of Ed check register to be
included in the board of Finance meeting
minutes um we don't have any kind of
controlling authority over the board of
Ed's spending it's the check register
was primarily requested from the uh
Board of Ed for the purposes of uh
closing the books on a monthly basis uh
and having that done timely so uh she's
Terry has been spending sending the
Town's reports over to the treasurer to
Cheryl uh she's been copying at least me
and Joanne I don't know that she's been
copying rest of the board and I know
Eric hasn't always been copied so what I
would propose is that if the board would
like to review it it might make sense to
include all of the board members we
could forward that on but I don't know
that we want to take it up as a matter
of
standing activity in our board meetings
to review uh that's my personal view so
that's my take does anybody have any
other comment
Joan yep yeah I I agree that it probably
shouldn't be in the packet because the
packets are posted and they're for the
whole town um but I have no problem I
knew we went back and forth a little bit
I have no problem with the board I think
they would want to see it because if
they're looking you know like you said I
know a couple members have expressed
wanting to see it month-to month so it
makes sense and I meant to forward the
latest ones to the board members but
I've just had a a crazy busy day today
um so I'm happy to do that later and
attach it you know in an email monthly
so that they can review it and I think
we can be more prepared and have
questions if we want to but not to put
it in the packet for the whole town to
see it before we even have a chance to
look it over yeah I mean in theory it
could be you know considered a matter of
public record if anybody really did want
to see it I just don't know that it adds
any value because if we looked at it
just like a member of the town the
public looked at they're if they had
something that seemed unusual they
wanted to ask questions about we don't
even have anybody at this meeting who
can answer them so right it's kind of
you know it's kind of a moot point I
mean if somebody had a question on the
board of ed spending then the
appropriate form for that would be the
Board of Ed meeting right uh and then
ask or or ask directly to the uh to the
administration uh so so I yeah I think
that that would be the appropriate
action any of the members disagree or
have an Al Viewpoint no I
agree I agree I think it's a great idea
thank you makes sense Joan do you want
to take the action to forward that then
yeah I mean do I have to publicly say it
or I will definitely do it I will no no
no I just want to make sure that it gets
I will make sure to take care of it yeah
disappointed I didn't have time today I
wanted to get that over there but I will
meeting yeah it's a good point you know
we talked about it but uh yeah okay yeah
yeah I didn't really think about it
either mainly because I I looked at is
as I said it's kind of a treasury you
know procedural function more than an
oversight and it's really not an
oversight function from our standpoint
and I think the check register too just
to to add to that I mean we'll watch
their month to month but I mean having
the reports and seeing you know it's
we're not it's not going to tell us much
month to month knowing that spending
could come in cycles and there's
different times so sure it's it's just
another data point for us to look yeah
but I don't think it's going to going to
say anything as far as you know okay
yeah month to month like I said L your
hand up yeah is it included in the Board
of Ed
agenda not the agenda the um packet I
don't think so I mean I I could be wrong
I don't think it's a Oh Shannon or Jerry
do you have any do you have any input I
can't remember I mean they do review the
financials but I don't know to what
level and I don't know if it's full part
of the packet or not the check register
is not part of the packet okay yeah you
know and I think you know as Joan made
the point you know it's often one of
those things even for the town that you
know we just look for something that
looks a little OD odd because we happen
to understand the town spending so it
might flag a question for us but doesn't
in and of itself as Joan said you know
doesn't really necessarily give you much
information
so so it sounds like we're agreed that
we probably don't need this as part of
our packet going forward but that you
know as as just a courtesy will forward
it to the uh to the other board members
so that they have access to it should
something uh come up okay and did they
give you the check register for all of
their checking accounts or just their
main
one I I forwarded it to you Eric I mean
I don't look at it to be
honest I just assume Cheryl Cheryl has
what she needs and that was my
[Music]
interest okay so if nobody has any else
on that we'll move on to item six which
is new business um first item thank you
for including this Eric is either you or
Kate um because I had a letter from the
town clerk reminding me that we have to
set our meeting dates for 2025 they need
to be posted I think it's within 30 days
uh of the first meeting uh as opposed to
the fiscal year but regardless it's uh
appropriate for us to do this early uh
and get this over with so um
[Music]
Eric had included a set of
proposed dates in
here um so this follows the if you go to
it's actually page 20 in the packet in
terms of the number of PDF uh on the
number of page on the PDF file uh this
follows the algorithm we be following
which is the fourth Wednesday of the
month at
7M um there's one exception noted and
that is for December are you sharing it
Eric okay thank you
so the one exception that Eric had noted
or one concern that he had noted is the
fourth Wednesday of December is
Christmas Eve uh so we have a choice if
we're going to stick with our Wednesdays
of either the 10th or the
17th uh but both of those conflict with
possible other committee meetings um I
would also like to point out though that
the November 26 is the day before
Thanksgiving I don't know about you but
I would prefer not to have a meeting
that day so what I would is that we
follow this schedule but instead we
alter the November date to November
19th and we change the December date to
December
17th yeah sounds good to
me that work for everybody yes you rob
yeah agree what I'm sorry what did you
say for the December date uh the 17 17th
17th
okay and this is for next year anyway
for 2025 25 yeah this year is the 18th
you know for instance uh this year we
have it on the 18 yeah but we obviously
do the same thing you know yeah every
every November December you got to look
at it and see how it bumps up against
the holiday I just want to plug this
into my phone that's why I'm sitting
here like this
because somebody want to make a motion
to accept the calendar as indicated with
those changes with those two changes
I'll make that motion okay okay Rob is
motioning that we um just to be clear
for the record Rob is motioning that we
uh set the board of Finance meeting
schedule to include for 2025 to have uh
the first meeting on January 22nd then
in February 26 March 26 April 23rd May
28th June 25th July 23rd August 27
September 24 October 29 November 19th
and December
17th okay and Louise was that you that
had second it I'll second that this is
going to be posted anyway on the um hand
oversite yeah post Okay calendar yeah so
just for clarification what are the
dates for this November December just so
I don't have that messed up
2024 are they the normal dates or are
they've been Al uh well there November
20th and December 18th yeah November
18th yeah thank you rob no
worries December 20th okay any further
discussion
either all right hearing n we'll call
for a vote all those in favor say I I hi
any
opposed any extensions
all right hearing none we'll move on
thank you uh and just for the record I
will uh send a letter to the town clerk
or a note to the town clerk advising her
of those dates uh as is required by the
board
chairs
okay thank you all
right and then the next item
is budget impact 6B so you have two
things in here Eric hiring a new zoning
enforcement officer and hiring an
assistant for the community
center sure I'm just giving the board a
heads up now that we did hire a new
zoning enforcement officer for the town
um the problem is is that there's an
awful lot of towns looking for one um
we've been on the search now for oh
close to five months um we finally found
somebody that would take the job but
they have zero experience as a Zeo um so
we are planning for a considerable
overlap between our current CEO and the
one that we have now in training so for
a period of time uh which is probably
going to be three to four months we are
going to have both of them on salary so
I would expect that is going to to be
somewhere around a $7,000 bump uh in the
total budget for that line item however
once Jim our current Zeo steps down the
initial Zeo is at a much lower hourly
rate until he gets his queso
certification so he should claw back a
significant portion of that by the end
of the budget year but I can't tell you
how that's going to work out totally um
other than we will be over budget on
that account um so I'm just giving you a
heads up
now um the second thing is we did hire
an assistant for the community center
and I apologize I'm I'm sick so I'm
losing my voice so hopefully it lasts
the meeting
um uh we did that for a couple of
reasons one we had a considerable
Savings in benefits because the director
that we hired uh does not require
medical insurance so it's taking the fee
in lie of so that's a significant
savings to the town and uh we hired her
for just because we hired her as a
part-time person we hired her at under
the salary cap so that be can I can I
interrupt just for because so that I
don't Circle back to that just at that
point because I don't think we ever got
the full story and I don't want you to
lose your voice so it can be really
brief
because I've heard you at other meetings
so we did not hire as we expected to a
full-time position person in a certain
amount of hours so this person that you
hired and found qualified is is indeed a
part-time person is that what you're
saying yep correct but would have and
I'll talk for it because I remember the
rules so um you know if they work I
believe it's 20 and above then they are
offered the benefit so she was in that
range so still could have gotten
benefits am I right or is it 25
hours it is 25 hours for health
insurance it is 20 20 hours for the
Municipal
Retirement so she is eligible for
Municipal Retirement and the town
doesn't have a choice regardless of
whether she wants it or not she's
enrolled in that um however she waved uh
health insurance because she's covered
under her husband's plan right I knew
that was your why you guys have such a
high in lie of you know compared to
other towns I know that you were you're
hoping that pays out in the long run and
and this is one that like you said it
did but how many hours is that person
working then I apologize
26 okay thank you sorry to interrupt
thank you
nope that's it for those two items well
sorry I interrupted when you were so
because we couldn't hire what we
budgeted for and talked about in a
full-time person we now need to bring
another part-time person on will this
part assistant person be less than the
20 hours can I make a suggestion if
we're going to discuss this we go into
executive section because there's some
things I really don't want to say about
Personnel right now I don't ever want to
this I was just doing the outside
because it's on our agenda whatever we I
would be happy to discuss that in
executive
session that's up to the other board
members you know how deep I get into the
HR stuff and and all of that so we don't
have to it can be it just was on our
agenda so I had those questions because
in the past it was going to be one
person covering all those hours and but
no that's that's fine so I'll I'll I'll
make a suggestion board can and can
entertain it and Eric you can weigh in
too please but what I would say is that
um maybe Joan you could take your your
question to Eric offline and you guys
can talk about it um and if you so
determine that it probably is something
that the rest of the board should be
aware of that we could either have an um
we we can't you can communicate to the
board we cannot make any substantive
decisions outside of a public meeting uh
but we could of course schedule an exec
session and our next meeting and and
discuss it then um but that way we're
not taking up too much time now for
something you know especially with
Eric's voice sounding like it's about to
go out the window so does that make
sense is that okay Eric you have
anything you nothing yeah when he's up
to it when his voice gets better okay
yeah and you know I think we can trust
the Jan to advise us if she thinks
there's something we should be aware of
and
so
okay thank you
y um so we have item 6C then if there's
nothing else on that for the additional
budget line items
so um Eric do you have anything to add
on that this is about the addal line
item for the Permanent Fund for the
community and Senior Center yeah so this
is very simple um because we're taking
in revenue for community and Senior
Center programs we need need a place to
put that money right now our only real
option is putting it in the general fund
um because it can't go directly into the
line items um associated with the
community center so the goal would be to
authorize the finance director Treasurer
to just add a line to the budget uh you
know as a Permanent Fund for the
community and Senior Center so that the
money can be deposited into
that seems to make total sense would
anybody have any questions or would
anybody like a motion so I just want to
make sure that so that money will not go
into the general fund it will go into a
separate fund just for the community
center programming correct correct
presumably you know that money would be
spent on Community Center
programming thank you Joan I'm sorry
that was just a followup to bill so
clearly when
we see the budget it would eventually be
under that well it's a fund so it's on
the revenue side correct yeah never mind
but I I'm in favor of it
too anybody like to make a motion to
authorize the
fund I'll make a motion to authorize
that new fund so Louise makes a motion
to authorize a uh Permanent Fund for the
community and Senior Center and have
that line item added to the bud budget
anybody want to second the motion I'll
second I'll second Kimberly saw your
hand up thank you any further
discussion all right all those in favor
say I
I any
opposed any
extensions okay motion passes
unanimously thank
you okay we will go on to item 6D which
is the sale of equipment for the public
works and Senior transportation
uh there is a letter in there explaining
the uh intent and the uh uh the
basically the recommendation from Jay
Tuttle um we had a he put uh some stuff
out for bid um a 2001 GI Deer tractor
and the Alm rear 3 point hitch mower
head uh he they asked for 30,600 total
received an opening bid of $26,000
for both items from the town of
Fairfield um so his note here is that
based on his research he believes this
to be a good and fair market offer and
he recommended approval to the board of
Selectmen that the sale of our Surplus
equipment
proceed um so Eric I don't know what we
need to do as the board of Finance for
that is this just advisory so that part
is just
advisory uh fairly recently we've
auctioned off a number of things the
most valuable thing was the the older
mower um and we also mow auctioned off
the old the old senior Transportation 20
passenger bus so uh all total between
both sets of auctions the town garnered
about
$30,000 um I had recommended to the
board of Selectmen that that money uh
get put in either the senior trans
transportation for the money from the
bus or the Public Works equipment fund
um the board of Selectmen felt it was
more appropriate to return money for
both items uh return everything to the
general fund and they recommended to you
as a board of Finance because ultimately
that's your decision uh that it be
returned to the uh general
fund interesting
well I guess I mean we can we can
remember that and decide you when we
make our decisions about when we work up
the next budget you know if we want to
put more money in the public works fund
we can do that are we are we looking at
a shortfall there or anything or is it
just you thought it'd be a good place to
put
it
uh
well
um yeah I think there will
be uh we were assuming we were going to
have the money in the public works
equipment fund when we budgeted uh for
the purchases that we've made so we will
adapt it's not that we can't deal
without it but um it is what it
is Jo yeah wasn't the whole point that I
I feel like they probably wanted to put
it back in the general fund because we
went ahead when it wasn't
budgeted last year when the equipment
was purchased if I cor if I you know and
took out the lease and I know we talked
about this at the board of Selectmen
meeting that recently took place so is I
would think that's their thought of why
they want to put it back into the
general fund because we've already gone
ahead and replaced the equipment that
was sold with new
equipment and so they're just feeding it
back into the general fund and then
moving on from there year to year in the
budget process am I wrong with that Eric
I think that's that's probably the
thought I look that was a political by
the board I'm
not I have my own opinions on it and why
but that's not something I want to share
with you guys I am passing along
verbatim What the board of Select
and since I go to all the meetings I'm
thinking that's probably the reason we
have the new equipment we're not short
changing
anything um but and that's why it's
going there and then they can present
their budget again and all the pieces of
equipment they might want to
replace that's the way I take it if any
other members of the board that's
listened to some of the stuff thinks
differently I mean it's just we got new
equipment we're auctioning off the old
so
that's all put it in the general fund
and and take it from there I don't Maybe
I'm Wrong maybe I'm being practical I
don't know so I don't mind varying I'm
just putting my thoughts out there yeah
I not like we're short changing them at
all they're getting they got new pieces
of
equipment bill you had your hand up did
you have something no I'm I'm good at
this
point anyone
else I i' just like to point out that
just because we put it into one fund
doesn't mean it can't be transferred at
a later time right or used for any
purpose you know that we would deem
appropriate um so you know it part part
unless I'm misunderstanding and I don't
think I am I mean the it's it's more of
a convenience thing and identifies the
intent but uh I don't have strong
feelings about it either way
so it sounds like Eric we need to make a
motion to uh move that money into any a
particular uh fund if anybody would like
to make a particular
motion I'll make the motion to put the
money into the general fund as the BOS
directed um sidebar knowing that we're
going to move things or or approve
things down the line if as needed I
don't know if someone's going to Second
it but I'll I'll second
yeah I saw Kim's hand up first so we'll
call her thank you uh further
discussion I'll just say I'm personally
not super opposed I think that the if
the budget was developed for public
works with the intention that there
would be we' be reclaiming that that
sale as an offset to other expenses it
probably you know we probably need to
make sure that that was explicit if it
was that would be the main reason to put
it in the public works fund um again you
know I think we can be flexible so I
don't have strong feelings about it one
way or the
other never stated that never came up I
just don't remember that being discussed
I it could have forgotten something but
yeah no I never heard it discussed that
way it was more going for the newer
equipment further discussion comments
questions okay we'll take a vote all
those in favor say
I I I any
opposed any
extensions okay sounds like it's
unanimous thank
you all right we will move on to agenda
item 6E so this is the addition of the
quote destratification fans never heard
that term before although it makes
logical sense I I learned it at the CIP
meeting last month yeah I know Des
gratification look like this came in
lower than we had anticipated this is
like half what I thought it was going to
cost maybe I mean so so this is the they
had requested that we consider this so
we've got a quote from the electrical
contractors of
9,829 21 it's broken down with material
equipment and
labor um and then we have another quote
associated with it for
6,400 oh that just lists the fans
themselves and so I'm confused are both
of these this project Eric or so let me
clarify I initially got a quote from the
town's uh kind of standard electrician
Lenco yeah um I but the total between
purchasing and that was assuming that
the town bought the fans themselves
so we didn't pay any mark up on the FI
um okay Leno was was okay with um
there's but that assumes that Lenco buys
we're just buying the fans and but I I I
couldn't figure out which sets of
controllers because they got all kinds
of different options okay to combine six
fans run them off two sensors with one
controller so this incl includes Rick or
Leno paying for that um so the total is
just over
$15,000 which ordinarily requires us to
go to an
RFP um I did get another estimate from
Seward electric who's the electrician
that the school generally uses um
that
uh was a couple thousand lower however
it left out a couple big things that
they were that Rick was supplying so
I've gone back to them and say well you
know they just said there's a note in
there saying the town's on the hook to
buy and get all the controllers there um
so I don't know what the cost of all of
the
additional um and it also doesn't uh
cover the cost of protecting the gym
floor so but any way you cut it it's
either slight lower than
Lenco um or the same as Lenco so you're
not
um you know it's going to be in that
ballpark so my question for the board is
do you want this to go to
RFP per the town's policy um or for your
policy or are you willing to say it's
close enough to the threshold that you
allow it to go with a quote from the
school's electrician and the town's
electrician and go with the lowest
bidder which presumably will be
seaward I I'll you see you answered my
first question which is I I have you
know kind of unwillingly become pretty
familiar with this type of work just
because of I ended up with I have
responsibilties for our facilities uh in
our business um as the corollary thing
uh so the electrical work
looked re very reasonable to me uh based
on you know what I know of what
electricians even favorably priced
electricians will will do the work for
um and I'm sure Leno is like the
electrician we often use in my business
which is you know we give him a lot of
work so he's not going to overcharge us
he treats us fairly well and I think
we've got the same situation here the
one concern I had was the amount for
material because I didn't get that based
on the fact that we were supplying the
fans so now that you explain that
they're supplying the controllers and
the mechanism that makes a lot more
sense to me so that being the case
unless we were to specify different fans
um you know I think if we were
specifying these fans you know you're
not going to get them less right you're
paying what you're paying so it's really
the $10,000 roughly of uh Contracting
work and including materials that that
we're bidding here so you know to me I'm
comfortable with the quote um and I'll
just leave it at that in terms of my my
comments um other comments or questions
from the
board I'm good with it uh I know CIP
when we had our meeting we approved up
to either 18 or 20 I think for this
project uh approved a recommendation for
that much so I'm pleased to see it come
in more like 15 and um you know I I'm
comfortable with with the two
bids I would Echo both your comments and
say the
same I agree as well yeah go ahead Ken
no I'm fine with it too yeah
okay I agree too makes
sense anybody want to make a motion to
wave the requirement to go to RFP for
this
project sure I'll make the motion okay
Rob so no so moved anybody a
second I'll say it okay Bill further
discussion okay for all we'll go ahead
and take a vote all those in favor say I
I I any
opposed any
extensions okay hearing none the motion
passes thank you I think that's very
reasonable it's going to get this done
you know we've been looking at this for
a while
right okay so we'll move on to item 6f
so these are the charter revision uh
questions so I'll I'll make a couple of
preliminary comments if I could so
obviously the first thing is that the
these questions are before the uh voters
of the town of Andover and not uh before
the board of Finance so um there this is
just merely kind of informational or
advisory um I suppose if we wanted to we
can make recommendations as a board of
whether we felt comfortable with them or
not um I would suggest that we only do
that unless we if we feel very strongly
about something in particular uh so
that's my first comment my second
comment is I would request that we not
waste anybody's times talking about uh
any of these proposed revisions that are
not directly related to the board of
Finance thank you yeah my third comment
would be that the information that is in
the packet
and that is in the sample ballot that
was mailed to your house is
not very detailed and what I mean by
that is if you really want to understand
the charter uh revision questions you
should look at the uh actual language of
the revisions I believe this is all
posted in the rivere bulletin and it is
also on the town's website they're not
substantively different but there are
some procedural things that that I think
the board would be well to do well to be
aware of the first thing is that it
requires by Charter that we meet with
the board of Selectmen by October 15 and
Set uh objectives and goals for example
uh for the budget if I remember that's
that's how it's uh stated obviously
that's not in effect this year because
it's not part of the charter um and
there's some other things there but you
know I think that these these
explanations in general do a fair job of
representing what the changes mean and
what their goals are but the devil is
sometimes in the details I don't think
that there is anything that I'm super
concerned about just from a board of
Finance procedural U matter um but it
does have some impacts on us number one
is the timing right so we have this
October 15th meeting that was stipulated
by the charter change uh we should be
aware of that um I don't think that's a
bad thing I think that's fine um the
other thing is that it moves up the
timing and as you if you read through
this um and through the explanation on
the sample ballot it will tell you that
the
primary I guess benefit of some of these
changes is to align the vote so that it
can
be um aligned with the uh RAM budget
referendum so obviously that has a
savings to the town and that we do not
need to hold two votes over very what's
essentially very similar uh questions
um there was another so that's kind of
the one thing the other thing that I
think you should be aware is that and
this isn't you again it's not it's not
spelled out in these explanations but
the charter then talks about the it it
it talks about the process of developing
the budget and makes it more aligned
with what we're actually doing by saying
that the Departments need to go to the
administrator with their proposed budget
and not to the board of Finance um but
then it also talks about budget review
meetings which shall be I'll open this
up there shall be budget review meetings
in March which shall be joint meetings
of the board of selectman and the board
of finance a quorum of at least one of
the two boards is required to conduct
business so basically this is saying is
that uh there must be some budget review
meetings uh which shall be joint
meetings of the board of selectman and
the board of Finance now as I read it it
doesn't prohibit us from having our own
budget review meetings there's nothing
in there it says we can't do that of
course that's within our purview but I
think that the intent here is to avoid
uh duplicate budget review meetings
which is kind of what happens in the
current process you know the board of
Selectmen holds review meetings we hold
review meetings we ask questions about
what was the intent of the board of
Selectmen here and then you know if
you're un unless you're Joanne you
probably haven't gone to all of them so
I think that there is some efficiencies
to be there but it it it you know again
this is something that's in the details
that isn't necessarily spelled out there
that does affect the the process that we
as the board would follow so just want
everybody to kind of be aware of that uh
I'm not sure there anything other that's
really that that significant other than
the timing um and then it talks about
how how we handle the board of meetings
the public hearings moved up you know
the budget hearings moved up what
happens if there's not a quum at the
budget you know it goes directly to
referendum so they're they're trying to
streamline this process a lot of which I
personally don't have a problem with but
I just think everyone should be aware
that uh there's a lot of changes here
it's not just a you know a few date
changes so I just wanted to mention Mark
that a lot of us were present the other
night which I thought was great they had
a
explanation you know meeting of the Town
Charter because I hadn't read all of
that defined details which I want to
read tighter but I thought it was
important that they did I I just
happened to be looking at the meetings
that week and saw it so we went and you
know a lot of us were present there and
we did you know some of us did speak up
I know you just said that maybe we
should you know not but I felt compelled
to talk about it a little bit nothing
the nothing the small things we're all
going to take the questions one by one I
know Bill wants to speak too but I do
have some big concerns with the timeline
process sure we'd all like life to be
streamlined and quicker and if that can
happen um and I didn't read the details
that there was going to be joint
meetings so I really do want to read
them but I worry and it's not the town's
fault but we know just for a
month-to-month meeting we don't always
get everything right on you know early
to have to be able to review it I just
felt there was a lot of pressure you
know and I spoke publicly for all the
town departments everybody to speed up
everything up and then you know what's
going to happen there might be decisions
early and there's going to be a bunch
more stuff that comes late even when we
had the regular meetings there's always
some things that you know are brought to
us late so it's my concern is the
pressure put on Eric um who puts that
document together I mean there was a
mistake in last year's document we know
and we we caught it I mean I get worried
about rushing you know and
and all for the thought of personally I
get I don't I'd love to know how much
you know the referendum's cost and I'd
love that by having the RAM and the
budget you know everything together that
it was going to make a difference I
really don't I mean they brought out a
lot of
percentages and um you know how many
people vote how many people go to the
meetings but I still think that every
person that does take the time to go to
meetings and yes I did take it seriously
and that's why I was able you know has
that chance I should finish my thought
I'm rushing ahead like if the Don
denley's of the world and the different
people that come every year and the
people that I've gotten to meet through
the years of being here want to have
that space in that Forum I'd like for
them to have it and I know we're not
taking it away but I do worry about the
rush it's hard enough for them to do
their regular jobs it's a four- day week
there you know a lot of part-time people
every Department getting things in and
trying to do the town's business Plus
getting this together and that's that's
my two cents that was my negative about
it is is rushing
it other comments or
questions just I was at the meeting too
and um one of the reasons that they
wanted to do things is to try and get
more people out to vote so where you
have you know the AES vote and a ram
vote they're separate or combining them
into one they were saying we get more
voters to turn out in one boat than in
two but I was just wondering what that
does to our timeline as far as preparing
everything would we have to move things
up a lot to be ready in time to vote for
the ram budget which is usually a week
before ours isn't that correct well yeah
we would have to move it up by by
Charter and you know what I
would I mean I I wasn't at the meeting
of the other business meeting but the
um you know what I think some of the
intent here is is that if we combine
activity with the board of
Selectmen um if you remember a lot of
the delays that we've had have not been
necessarily be generated by the
Departments or by Eric it's been
generated because the port of selectman
took a pretty long time to review it so
I'm thinking that perhaps and it needs
to work this way but perhaps that if you
have joint meetings starting early on
everybody's got a pretty solid
understanding of what the what the
issues are and what the concerns are
early on um so if that's the case it
really truly could be a more efficient
process um I'm also someone who knows
that in some cases I mean we've all been
in the real world right that the work
expands to fit the time allowed so if we
you know if we if we crunch it up a
little bit and we need to be reasonable
I think that we can uh probably probably
get it done um you know I didn't have
major concerns about the timing but it
does it does mean that people are going
to have to act in the Departments and
then of course Eric and the and the and
the treasurer are going to have to act
you know so would we schedule time Mark
for our own independent reviews or all
review would be with the board of
Selectmen I mean it it doesn't stay
there's nothing that would prohibit us
from holding our independent reviews and
I'm just thinking too the amount of time
that we take to go through this it's a
pretty lengthy period of time that we do
this and you know with the five people
on the board and then you take in I
don't know if are the board and
Selectmen always totally in agreement on
what the items are or are we to be kind
of like a much larger board all trying
to work at the same time I can picture
the meeting is getting longer and more
complex I guess but I'm not sure if
that's a proper analysis or not I'm just
thinking 10 people working in a room
trying to get their points across trying
to get their views and I just think it's
nice when we get a you know the board of
Select come together they put together
their plan their views hey we could talk
to them and have a meeting up front when
they deliver the package to us maybe
they meet with us tell us what their
views are what the thoughts are what the
plans are kind of give us an oversight
and then we go through and do what we
normally
do you know each week that we get
together I think that makes a little
more sense or maybe there's a date the
beginning of a Daye at the end that we
meet with the board of Selectmen but I
do like that kind of independent Board
of Finance review that we've done as
much time as it does take I think it's
worthwhile so yeah and I I think that
that if you know there's some language
omitted in these uh you know in the
charter change document that indicates
the changes but I I I think that
ultimately it still is the board of
finance's responsibility to recommend a
budget to hold a budget hearing and then
to uh basically pass the budget on to
budget and I just wouldn't want to feel
pressure by being in the same meeting of
the board of Selectmen with them pushing
their agenda or for each item I think
that's a separate meeting when we
approve that I don't think that's a
joint meeting all all this all the
language it it in terms of what I see
the only you know this just requires
that we have the joint meeting or you
know in in March it could be one it
doesn't say you have to have two or
three or five or whatever you know so
from my standpoint it still gives us the
opportunity to have individual meetings
um I would foresee us having that for
the final budget we are the financial uh
Authority for the town from that uh from
that standpoint um that would be my
question I didn't know who's the final
say I I have to read the I have to read
between the weeds as people have said or
you know because this these are some
important changes you know that are
going to affect everything and
I I wasn't sure and a lot of people were
pointing out at that meeting that what's
what you're looking at Mark is a lot
more complex than what we were reading
in the one one little line and then a
little explanation obviously even if I
was presenting something I would slant
it my way I would want to bring out the
positives that they're seeing but thank
you for bringing up some of the other
things I was just being true to myself
and just know how long it took us every
year so was concerned for the timeline
mistakes making sure we covered
everything just the process you know
having been so many years on the board
now that was my concern with everybody
just kind of sitting in a room and
saying well let's do this so we can get
some more votes I understand the need I
would love to see more people
vote um but is that I I don't know what
that's ultimately going to do either you
know with our with our
population because I'm always surprised
with the whole Ram thing too that I've
tried to get involved and like throw
information out there and say how maybe
a few things could be changed and it
really hasn't affected anything so even
if we get more voters out that's a good
thing but it seemed to be that was their
their Theory let's get more voters out
when I yeah on that one
day I I ask a
question
[Music]
um do we know how the other towns do it
like Hein and Marboro do they hold their
their budget vote the same time as the
ram
budget Hein does Hein holds one vote for
both
budgets so it can be done it's a matter
of yeah Malboro has been talking about
it but I don't think they're aligned
with that schedule
yet yeah I like the idea of doing it
together for sure but I can definitely
see your point Joanne I mean it's just
so time consuming to to just say let's
do it three weeks earlier and and make
sure that everything that they need has
been thought that's so scary listen I'd
love it if it freed up our time and all
those meetings and those late nights and
lack of sleep and what whatever but we
gain two weeks of the board of Select
when we get their stuff done on time
that's easy we're the ones that have the
statutory requirement as part of the
charter as to when we have to have our
meetings but uh yeah
although their meetings are good too
when they discuss different things you
know yeah so I'm going to shush and let
everybody else Give opinions everybody's
I've been full out on I'm just I'm
worried about mistakes I'm worried about
just everything that's going to come
with it so we want to do a good job as a
board I I just to get a few hundred
extra votes you know I want that but
let's just promote more and get
everybody to vote you know so so I'd
love more votes all the time
so other questions or comments from the
board I'm over a similar mind in that I
completely understand the idea of trying
to put the votes together uh I have no
problem with that as a concept uh but I
have my concerns about compressing our
schedule I think I expressed that when
this first came up I I'm a little
dubious that it would go as smoothly I
mean it's not that we if it happened we'
do it uh but would we miss more stuff
um you know even even now you know we're
capable overlooking a small thing like
you know there were a couple little
earier secrecies this year that we that
we missed so I I'd rather not do it but
if the voters approve it then you know
we'll roll with it we'll have to um
we'll make it happen we'll make it work
somehow Eric I just have a couple quick
points I mean looking back on it the
last four years
generally uh
I've got my first you know serious
completed draft of the budget sometime
between January 15 and January 20th um
and put it in the hands of the board of
Selectmen now the reason I put it in
their hands is because they've been
insisting on it they have no real
statutory authority to review it but
they're my boss so if they tell me they
want six weeks to review the budget then
you know I'm kind of bound to that so
what the board has kind of talked about
is and and what I think is totally
appropriate is there're in charge of
kind of big picture questions for the
town where do we go what are the major
priorities um you know so by having an
early goal setting meeting with both
boards I have the direction of where the
boards want to go instead of us now
what's happening is I'm producing my
budget giving them to the budget and
then we're having the big picture
questions yeah you know which take like
you know six weeks to propagate through
before the board of Finance so I think
the board of Finance should end up with
the same amount of time that they have
now just shifted
earlier the one caveat there's two
caveats to that in my mind the first is
the reality is on January 22nd I don't
have all the numbers because we rely on
a lot of shared services so while I'm
going out and getting
estimates and there's a lot of things
that are out of my control and I am not
going to know until later in the budget
process so no matter what we do
throughout the budget process we will be
adjusting things but remember we're
relying on state funding for a
significant fraction of our total budget
and they often don't pass their budget
to June or later so we we've long since
adopted a budget before we have final
numbers over you know what
is you know 20% of our budget so there's
always going to be some imperfections in
there whether you we where you start the
process the later you start the process
the more accurate information you're
going to have and that's a good thing
um but uh generally speaking the
corrections aren't big
Corrections um you know because most
times you can get a reasonable estimate
from ahm and from nikog over animal
control services and all these things
ahead of time but you don't have actual
final numbers until they pass their
portions of the budget so that's all I
had to say other than that I'll do
whatever you guys you know want as far
as the budget I mean that's my job um
the only thing is I want to go on
vacation the beginning of March to
mayorca for a while so uh I'm gonna skip
a little time in March um I've gone back
and forth about when I can afford to
take time in the town but the problem is
there's no season when it's not
problematic for me to be gone so
um you know we can discuss it but but uh
I would like to take some time in March
um and you defied for a
while uh at least go for like six weeks
right so no at least a week certainly
not more than two somewhere between
those two numbers all right so yeah I'll
you know just to so thank thanks for
that that helps Eric you know I'll uh
you know I'll just say a couple things
one is you know I've been doing this for
several years now probably not as long
as as Rob he's probably the the longest
uh serving member of this board um but I
think those of you have been on Louise
and I probably been on some some maybe
Louise have been on longer than I have I
can't remember but things generally
don't change that much in any on line
item between December and March they
really te typically don't we don't see
any things that comes in and we're like
oh my God we didn't expect that I mean
it happens some things change I mean the
we never know how much the state trooper
is going to cost us and if one person
moves into a different job and we get a
you know somebody who's at a higher
salary you know we can be a $20,000
swing you know so we've had some stuff
like that but nothing I think that we
can't absorb and as Eric makes clear we
and we all know from doing this
previously and if you watched it um you
know we don't know what the state's
going to going to give us for you know
some of the reimbursements ETC the other
thing I'll say is that and any of you
who've worked in business who've had
responsible for budgeting have probably
run into the same thing but you know we
develop our budget starting in
September you know and we know they're
wrong we know they're not going to be
perfect it's just an estimate but we
have to start with a plan and we can
adjust things as they go along so I'm
concerned about compressing the schedule
too much also so the key is not to
compress the schedule the key is to
start the process earlier I think um so
that would be you know that would be my
my kind of two
I have just one further Thing Mark it's
just are we going to I get that and I
get that things can be tweaked and do
little things but are we gonna have and
this is a town thing and the town's
voting but we are discussing it but by
putting this earlier and Eric so
involved is this gonna have to just take
so much of his time you know constantly
getting estimates and doing this I'd
rather see him be able to and again this
is not not my decision he has bosses but
is he going to have to then just be so
much more into it from earlier through
June whereas maybe if we just kept it uh
you know you know constantly and maybe
he constantly is already and he can
answer to that versus devoting his time
to all the other projects we're going to
talk about later or things that he has
to do I hate to have him as our Town
Administrator manager so wrapped up into
this changing all the time that that's
that's my thought with it just getting
long earlier so now we're starting it
earlier is he going to have to be
constantly tweaking it because you know
that's
all any other
comments okay I'm gonna suggest then
that probably we just need to move on
and read read the tax vote you know vote
your you know whatever you think is most
appropriate for the town and uh advise
others to do so um you know obviously we
all all have a stake in this so okay all
right well we'll go ahead and move on in
the agenda then the next item is the
administrator report we have 7A active
Grant List and 7B project summary Eric
you uh want to give us the overview as
long as your voice holds out sure so I
just wanted to give you guys the list I
gave this to the board selectman a while
back but I never gave it to the board of
Finance just so you have kind of an
understanding of what we have going in
terms of actual projects that are
underway and what the grant funding
level is um we've been relatively
successful grant
funding um I think we're actually at the
saturation point where um honestly I
have as much or more grant money in than
I can handle in terms of of
projects
um
so yeah that's kind of the the first
thing was kind of like what what we had
available for Grants um the two things
that I'm kind of working on very
actively right now is the arpa grant for
the senior center because we have to
have that money encumbered by the middle
of December um and I'm also working on
figure figing out how to deal with the
Acoustics in the community room in the
new building as well as the community
center because I think there is
um you know there's certainly a lot of
movement
um you know I I think the board wants
the ability to be able to do better uh
hybrid
meetings that that's something the town
struggles with we we're fine with
regular Zoom meetings you know we're
fine with in-person meetings uh but the
hybrid setup has some problems um so uh
but part of those problems can't be
resolved without better Acoustics and
both of the two major meeting rooms so I
am assuming that I'm going to take the
last of the arpa money um and we have
about
$5,000 left plus or minus out of the
arpa funds uh the original just under $1
million allotment um and spend that on
dealing with the Acoustics for the
building I'm sure we'll also take some
money from the building maintenance fund
uh to do it um so and the other the
arpit grant for the senior center that
is to purchase equipment for the kitchen
uh we had a good productive meeting on
Thursday of last week with the uh town
sanitarian from Eastern Highlands Health
um you know because we're trying to get
uh eventually have that set up as a true
commercial kitchen um so that we could
do events there without temporary
permits um but it does uh require some
investment and while we have the grant
funding um we might as well spend the
state's money or the federal
government's money as opposed to our own
um the other thing that is a delay
unfortunately is the federal government
has not passed a budget uh for the year
for like the 11th year in a row they
failed to meet their Federal
responsibility um so until that happens
there are no Congressional
Appropriations and as most of you know
we have a congressional appropriation in
to finish off some of the the basement
in the senior center uh the rest of the
stuff of the kitchen and a generator
that will handle the the uh the whole
Municipal campus so Town Hall Community
Center and uh um fire
department um so that's it on the grant
side um we did get reimbursed for uh the
majority of the HVAC work for the town
hall um so we still have some money um
available in lowp funds that can be
spent for
projects um you know and but that's
going to have to go we're going to have
to go back to CIP and talk about you
know what we want to spend it on and
where and then go through the process uh
for that um I also put in there a
project summary the two um things that
the thing that's probably gonna need the
most attention by the board of Finance
is the Bunker Hill Bridge um while that
is construction of that is 100% funded
between the state and federal government
the town is on the hook to pay the
contractors and then get
reimbursed um we currently have a pool
of about a half million dollars in a
fund specifically for that but there's
going to be several months uh like the
month that the bridge the pre-cast
Bridge structure gets there where we're
going to have bills that uh exceed that
so we are probably going to need to have
some sort of Swing loan um from a bank
to cover that because although we have
enough total in our unencumbered fund
balance that we could self fund that
that's very risky because we would be
drawing that way down to do that and
it's probably much safer
in my mind to you know just have a you
know for lack
a essentially a HELOC for the town um
you know for short-term expenditures
until we get
reimbursed um so that would need
approval by the board of finance that
may take a public meeting at this point
um I've asked the town's attorney what
what actually has to happen to do that
um so I don't know what your thoughts
are on that but that's probably the
biggest pressing thing that the board of
Finance really is going to need to be
involved
in question um oh yeah I don't know how
much experience we've we've had with
this kind of reimbursement situation but
is do we have a guest for what is
typical in terms of how long will be out
the money that's the question I
had
so the state says they can guarantee it
within six weeks um I'm not sure I
really buy
that um you know at any one time I think
our our worst month so that's one of the
questions I had for all the contractors
involved is what is our worst case
scenario our one month
expenses um and from their
perspective the month the bridge uh uh
the pre-cast Bridge sections get there
the pre-cast Bridge portions are going
to be somewhere around 600 grand total
something like that so that month
they're estimating a million maybe a
little bit north of a million um most
months will be under what we already
have in our fund set
aside other
questions I just not we don't have to
take action on this now but need to be
prepared or if anybody has any strong
directional opinions we can certainly
Express them
but it's h good to be forearmed with
this
knowledge so it's a rolling
reimbursement as we get bills in we
submit them they pay us back and okay
right so that that's hence the month
yeah so you have that one month we we
lay out a million two and then we're
waiting for six eight weeks or whatever
it is for reimbursement and that's the
issue okay got it right and it gets a
little weird because some of the
reimbursement comes from the state and
some comes from the federal government
and I don't think they've totally worked
out whether the feds pass it through to
the state they both give us one check
they both give us checks at different
times um can't get an answer on that so
far Eric is it when you what I think you
call it a swing loan are like what are
the interest rates that we would pay
like I gotta imagine they're going to be
in the six seven per range you know not
to mention any fees to close
so yeah so I'm just wondering do would
take more sense just to take out a
certain loan right from the beginning of
the project to know that we always have
enough money to pay I don't know I don't
I'm just floating things around my mind
here like would you be would you be
constantly taking out separate swing
loans would be one loan that you qualify
for that you can draw off of as needed
until
reimbursed yeah it's basically um like
an open line of credit almost right
that's exactly what it is it's a line of
credit you know you have up to x amount
of dollars that you can tap but you only
tap it when you pay bills and then you
immediately reimburse so that that
amount that you o can be going from zero
to you know a million say um and back
down in a pretty short period so even
though the interest rate's pretty
considerable and that the town would be
eating that um as an
expense the uh the duration of that
should be pretty
short gotcha thank you
any other comments or
questions okay well thank you Eric
that's a good overview and we will have
to keep that in mind we
will go ahead and move on to agenda item
8 which is the board open discussion
does anybody have anything they'd like
to bring before the
board all right I have one thing then we
have been remissed yeah what's that when
you're done Mark I have just a quick
item too okay so I I thought about um I
know that we have November we have
elections coming up soon and I started
thinking about our internal procedure we
had agreed a while back to hold
elections for chair or make a decision
on on nominations and election for chair
and vice chair of the board and I was
thinking we had decided to do that
following the typical election cycle um
but I went back back to verify and we
had not we had actually voted as a board
to do that in July so we must have done
it like after the budget cycle or
something decided that was the thing to
do and this was back in July of
2022 so we're we're remiss in doing that
we had some changes because Diane left
the board and um so whatever um but what
I would suggest is that we put this on
the agenda for next uh for the next
meeting my personal thought is that we
probably ought to elect the chair and
vice chair in the November meeting or
the first one to follow the election uh
that makes sense because although no
none of our seats are up uh this year
they will be next year so we run on an
every two-year cycle and I think it's
reasonable for the board to elect its
chair and vice chair after the new
members have been elected so that you
know if something changes is you know
somebody runs doesn't get reelected
doesn't run again uh we don't end up
with a hole we got a fail anyway so to
me it just makes more sense to do it on
the election cycle uh but it's not on
our agenda tonight we didn't change I
didn't throw it into add the item but I
do think we should discuss this at our
next meeting and if if come up with a
either we should either follow that and
just you know do the process of of of
voting on a chair and a vice chair um
and possibly amend our
internal uh guideline or policy of of
when we vote um if it's to be after the
election or after the budget the fiscal
year you know like I said my personal
view would be it makes more sense to do
it after the election uh because then
you'll have a fresh board uh on that
cycle and they should be the ones to
nominate and vote on their chair and
vice chair so anyway that's all I got I
think we can talk about it next week I
don't think it's a critical thing
uh but we should uh revisit that and
make sure we follow the
process uh Joanne yeah mine very very
quick just because I was included on an
email that discussed something um
someone copied me on it so which I
appreciated they were asking um Cheryl
our Treasurer um if the AES Capital um
Improvement or Capital fund whatever we
titled it the one we had voted on
creating at one of our meetings last
year they just were following through
and making sure that that had been
created um and is in use and all of the
funds that we had voted on in meetings
and things had been put in that fund so
Eric do you have knowledge of that like
any of the checks that have been
returned or things of that nature has
everything gone into that account or
fund I guess we're calling it a fund
yeah as far as I know it has okay so
there was
go ahead there was the initial roughly
$88,000 that got rolled over from
another fund there was approximately 120
that was transferred in uh by consent of
the board of Finance from the board of
EDS
overages and then there was the
$100,000 that was in the last year's
budget so I'm thinking there's around
228,000
in that fun something in that range and
did you mention sorry Eric one part I
know you know obviously the budgeted
amount what we voted on to to put in
there and then wasn't there when the
driveway thing didn't happen so that
check would be returned to that did that
go in there as well yes that was the
120,000 I just sorry I wasn't clear
that's all I just wanted since they
copied me on it I figured I could bring
it up we were having a meeting and it
was timely so thank
you so I will get you the exact balance
of the AES Capital fund for the next
meeting thank you
Eric um anything else for the
board okay um just noting that Shannon
asked about a policy uh change uh I
think that should be added to the next
uh meeting agenda and we can uh discuss
there
um okay so moving on then if nobody has
anything else we move on to the next
agenda item that is public speak I'm
sorry correspondence I didn't receive
any correspondence uh related to the
board's activities anybody
else okay hearing none we'll move on to
item 10 which is agenda item 10 public
speak uh Eric want to go
around uh
sure so let's see first up Shannon
Lowden nothing thank
you uh next up Melissa
latesa well set thank
you okay and the last one is
Jen all said thank
you okay was there anybody I
missed no I think that's
everybody okay very good thank you Eric
thank you for the public for your
attendance uh we will move on to
adjournment anybody like to make a
motion to
adjourn I think we should let Liz make
the motion since it's her first meeting
and she needs to
practice I'll make a motion I don't want
to push you Liz you may you know that
would be
inappropriate okay so Liz Liz make the
motion to adjourn anybody like to second
that I will Kimberly saw your hand up
first
thank you very much any
discussion all those in favor say
I any opposed any
abstentions can't imagine why you
abstain on a vote to aurn but I gotta
ask